
D5.22
At any stage before the case is sent to the Crown Court for trial or before (or during) a summary trial, a magistrates' court may adjourn the proceedings (see the MCA 1980, ss. 10 and 18, and D5.29).

D5.27
It is possible to challenge the grant or refusal of an adjournment by way of judicial review (see D29.25 et seq.). However, the Divisional Court will be 'particularly slow' to interfere with a decision to refuse an adjournment, given the discretionary nature of that decision (per Clarke J in R (CPS) v Uxbridge Magistrates [2007] EWHC 205 (Admin), at [5]).
In DPP v Petrie [2015] EWHC 48 (Admin), Gross LJ said (at [21]) that the grant or refusal of an adjournment 'is a paradigm example of a discretionary case management decision where an appeal ought only to succeed on well-recognised but limited grounds (for example, error of principle, error of law or where the decision can properly be characterised as plainly wrong)'. An example of such a case is Pari-Jones v CPS [2018] EWHC 3482 (Admin), where the magistrates' court had refused an adjournment despite the fact that neither D nor her solicitor could attend court because of bad weather. Andrews J, remitting the case for retrial, said (at [12]) that it was 'self-evident that if the magistrates had taken into account all the relevant considerations and if they had balanced [D's] right to a fair trial with the lack of fault caused by the weather conditions, the fact that she had already attended court previously, and all the other relevant considerations, they could not have refused this adjournment'. A similar approach was taken in R (Parashar) v Sunderland Magistrates' Court [2019] EWHC 514 (Admin), [2019] 2 Cr App R 3(18), where it was held that 'the decision to fix a date for a trial at which the prosecution expert could attend and the defence expert (whose report had been served in good time) could not was clearly wrong' (per Bean LJ, at [46]). His lordship noted that if the trial had proceeded on that basis, D's ability to present his defence 'would have been seriously compromised and the trial would inevitably have been unfair'. Simler J concurred, saying (at [49]):
To insist on a trial date on which the prosecution expert was available but the defence expert was not was wrong and would have led to an unfair trial. There is a high public interest in summary trials taking place quickly and on the day set for trial, and in adjournments not being granted absent compelling reasons. But it is also necessary as a matter of fairness and in the interests of justice, where a defence request to vacate a trial date is made, to consider whether, if it is not granted, the defendant will be able fully to present his defence, and if he will not be able to do so, the degree to which the defence will be compromised.

D5.29
Statutory Provisions on Power to Adjourn The power to adjourn is contained in the MCA 1980, ss. 10(1) and 18(4).
Magistrates' Courts Act 1980, ss. 10 and 1810.— (1)     A magistrates' court may at any time, whether before or after beginning to try an information, adjourn the trial, and may do so, notwithstanding anything in this Act, when composed of a single justice.
(2)     The court may when adjourning either fix the time and place at which the trial is to be resumed, or, unless it remands the accused, leave the time and place to be determined later by the court.
…(4) On adjourning the trial of an information the court may remand the accused and, where the accused has attained the age of 18 years, shall do so if the offence is triable either way and— (a)     on the occasion on which the accused first appeared, or was brought, before the court to answer to the information he was in custody or, having been released on bail, surrendered to the custody of the court; or (b)     the accused has been remanded at any time in the course of proceedings on the information;
 and, where the court remands the accused, the time fixed for the resumption of the trial shall be that at which he is required to appear or be brought before the court in pursuance of the remand or would be required to be brought before the court but for section 128(3A) below.
18.— (1)     Sections 19to 23 below shall have effect where a person who has attained the age of18 years appears or is brought before a magistrates' court on an information charging him with an offence triable either way and— (a)     he indicates under section 17A above that (if the offence were to proceed to trial) he would plead not guilty, or (b)     his representative indicates under section 17B above that (if the offence were to proceed to trial) he would plead not guilty.
…(4)     A magistrates' court proceeding under sections 19 to 23 below may adjourn the proceedings at any time, and on doing so on any occasion when the accused is present may remand the accused, and shall remand him if— (a)     on the occasion on which he first appeared, or was brought, before the court to answer to the information he was in custody or, having been released on bail, surrendered to the custody of the court; or (b)     he has been remanded at any time in the course of proceedings on the information; and where the court remands the accused, the time fixed for the resumption of the proceedings shall be that at which he is required to appear or be brought before the court in pursuance of the remand or would be required to be brought before the court but for section 128(3A) below.

D5.30
Remanding the Accused on Adjournments The MCA 1980, s. 128(1), provides that, whenever a magistrates' court has power to remand a person, it may either remand in custody or remand on bail, in accordance with the BA 1976. Accordingly, the references in ss. 10 and 18 to 'remanding' an accused mean either a remand in custody (i.e. committing the accused to custody to be brought before the court at the end of the period of remand or at such earlier time as the court may require), or a remand on bail in accordance with the provisions of the BA 1976 (i.e. directing the accused to appear before the court at the end of the period of the remand or, if bail is made continuous, directing that the accused appear at every time to which the proceedings maybe adjourned) (MCA 1980, s. 128(1) and (4)).Challenging Decisions on AdjournmentsSection 18 governs adjournments until allocation (mode of trial) has been determined. Section 10 applies to appearances for summary offences up until conviction, and to appearances for either-way offences from after mode of trial has been determined in favour of summary trial to conviction. Sections 10(4) and 18(4) provide (in almost identical terms) that, on adjourning proceedings for an either-way offence, the court must remand the accused (on bail or in custody) unless the accused: (a) first appeared in answer to a summons or requisition (as opposed to being brought before the court in custody or appearing in answer to police bail); and (b) has not been remanded at an earlier hearing.
It follows that the magistrates may, at their discretion, adjourn without remanding the accused: (a) at all appearances for summary offences up to conviction; and (b) at appearances for either-way offences up to either a determination for trial on indictment or summary conviction, provided the accused initially appeared in answer to a summons or requisition and has not subsequently been remanded. In R (Iqbal) v Canterbury Crown Court [2020] EWHC 452 (Admin), [2020] 2 Cr App R 1 (1), Carr J (at [48]), having noted that the Court had been informed that defence solicitors currently advise their clients that, if they are released under investigation and then receive a postal requisition, they would not be remanded in custody if they comply (and have in the past complied) with their attendance requirements, unless there is a material change in circumstances, said that if this was indeed a practice, 'there is no proper or principled basis for it. The full history and background will be taken into account by a court ... but there can never be any guarantee of bail once a defendant is charged.' Nonetheless, it is submitted that, where a defendant appears in court in response to a written charge and requisition, the question of bail arises only if the magistrates' court chooses to remand the defendant rather than simply adjourning the case; in such a case, the question of remanding the accused is likely to arise only if there appears to be a good reason for considering a remand in custody.
Where a case is simply adjourned, there is no need to fix the date for the next hearing at the time of adjourning, whereas if there is a remand the adjournment date must be fixed forthwith and is the date to which the accused is remanded. An accused who is not remanded and who then fails to appear on the date to which the case is adjourned commits no offence, but it may be possible either for an arrest warrant to be issued or for the proceedings to be conducted in the absence of the accused. An accused who has been remanded on bail and who then fails without reasonable cause to surrender to custody commits an offence under the BA 1976.
End of DocumentPeriod of Remand in CustodyBlackstone's Criminal Practice 2022  >  PART D PROCEDURE  >  Section D5 Starting a Prosecution and Preliminary Proceedings in Magistrates' Courts  >  ADJOURNMENTS AND REMANDS ON BAIL AND IN CUSTODY
D5.31
The maximum period for which a magistrates' court may remand an accused in custody is 'eight clear days' (MCA 1980, s. 128(6)). This is subject to the following exceptions:
 (a)     following summary conviction, there may be a remand in custody of up to three weeks (four weeks if the remand is not in custody) for inquiries, such as a pre-sentence report, to be made into the most suitable method of dealing with the accused (MCA 1980, s. 10(3));
 (b)     following the court being satisfied that the accused 'did the act or made the omission charged', there may be a remand in custody of up to three weeks (four weeks if on bail) for a medical examination and reports if the court considers that an inquiry should be made into the physical or mental condition of the accused before deciding how to proceed (PCC(S)A 2000, s. 11(1) and (2));
 (c)     where mode of trial is determined in favour of summary trial but the court is not constituted so as to proceed immediately to trial (e.g., because it consists of a single lay justice), there may be a remand in custody to a date on which the court will be properly constituted even if the remand is for a period exceeding eight clear days (MCA 1980, s. 128(6)(c));
 (d)     where s. 128A of the MCA 1980 applies, a second or subsequent remand in custody may be for up to 28 clear days; and (e)     an accused who is already being detained under a custodial sentence may be remanded in custody for up to 28 clear days or the anticipated release date, whichever is the shorter (MCA 1980, s. 131).

D5.32
Further Remands A person who is brought before the court after an earlier remand may be remanded again (MCA 1980, s. 128(3)). Thus, there maybe several remand hearings before the case is sent to the Crown Court or the commencement of summary trial. The only limitation on the number of remands is the general discretion of magistrates to refuse an adjournment if it would be against the interests of justice (e.g., because they consider that the party requesting the adjournment should have been ready to proceed on the present occasion). By s. 130, a court remanding an accused in custody may order that, for subsequent remands, the accused be brought up before a different magistrates' court nearer to the prison where the accused is to be confined while on remand. That alternate court then enjoys the same powers in relation to remand that the original court would otherwise have.
The MCA 1980, s. 128, is without prejudice to the provisions of s. 129. Under s. 129(1),in the absence of the accused the magistrates may remand the accused to a convenient date, and any restrictions on the period of the remand which would otherwise be imposed by s. 128(6) do not apply. Section 129(1) applies whether the remand is in custody or on bail, but is restricted to cases where non-attendance on the day originally fixed is due to 'illness or accident'. In Hillman v Governor of Bronzefield Prison (24 May 2013 unreported), it was held that the failure to produce D in court because of an error in the administrative process is capable of amounting to an 'accident' within the meaning of s. 129(1), thus enabling the magistrates to remand D in custody in her absence. Moreover, by virtue of s. 129(3), where an accused has been remanded on bail, the court may grant bail in the absence of the accused simply by appointing a later time for appearance. Section 129(3) applies only to remands on bail but places no Period of Remand in Custodyrestrictions on the reasons for which the court may choose to exercise its powers under the subsection. Thus, bail may be granted under s. 129(3) where it becomes apparent during the remand period that the court will not have time to deal with the case on the day originally fixed, or where the accused fails to attend but some acceptable reason is advanced for the non-appearance (not necessarily sickness or accident). Where bail is granted in such a case, the court may also 'enlarge' the recognizances of any sureties (i.e. they will be under an obligation to secure the accused's attendance on the new hearing date).
End of DocumentRemands in Custody in the Absence of AccusedBlackstone's Criminal Practice 2022  >  PART D PROCEDURE  >  Section D5 Starting a Prosecution and Preliminary Proceedings in Magistrates' Courts  >  ADJOURNMENTS AND REMANDS ON BAIL AND IN CUSTODY
D5.36
Under the MCA 1980, s. 128(6)(a), the accused may be remanded for a period greater than eight clear days if the remand is on bail and both the accused and the prosecution agree to a longer period of remand.
End of DocumentStatutory Provisions on Duration of RemandsBlackstone's Criminal Practice 2022  >  PART D PROCEDURE  >  Section D5 Starting a Prosecution and Preliminary Proceedings in Magistrates' Courts  >  ADJOURNMENTS AND REMANDS ON BAIL AND IN CUSTODY